---
layout: blogpost
title: Finding Dory reminds us to cherish differences, in a world where hate seems easier
---

Every Pixar franchise has an underlying theme that goes beyond what we initially thought they will be about. As much as we like the idea of our toys coming to life when we’re not in our bedrooms, Toy Story showed us our own Holden Caulfield-esque fear of growing up. WALL-E, a film about a semi-sentient janitor robot literally cleaning up the mess that people made on Earth, proved that our laziness does drive innovation but warns us that embracing it instead of looking for healthier sources of inspiration will be our demise. All of Pixar’s films are billed as family-friendly entertainment, but the two that tackled family in the most direct sense are The Incredibles and Finding Nemo.

In 2003’s Finding Nemo, a clownfish named Marlin lost his son and goes through lengths to, er, find him. Along the way he meets Dory, a blue tang with short-term memory loss. They swim across the ocean to try to save Marlin’s son Nemo. It’s a perfect pitch buddy adventure. After all that, a lesser studio would make the point of the film as “fishes in your aquariums have feelings too.” But this is Pixar. And who would’ve thought that a film about anthropomorphic fishes will mirror the universal conflict between overprotective parents and their children, without vilifying either of them and making its viewers (who were mostly parents and their children) understand both sides. Finding Dory, which is Pixar’s best non-Toy Story sequel to date runs on this idea and transcends it.

Dory’s short-term memory loss was played for laughs in Finding Nemo. But in Finding Dory, it’s the film’s foundation. The film starts with a cute baby Dory being assisted by her parents to do basic things. It may not be as resonant at once to a normal family, and by god I’ve read too many reviews of this film ignoring this, but to parents who have a child with special needs that first scene and Dory’s flashbacks to that time hold so much power. Dory’s parents Jenny and Charlie pushes Dory to overcome her disability with patience and optimism. They know that building a protective shell around her will just make her feel more isolated than she already is. This is in direct contrast to Marlin in the original film where he tries his best to keep Nemo and his tiny fin away from harm. 

It’s easy to say that Marlin has a shallow view of things and represents everything that is wrong with parenting. But in a world like ours, where terrorists are bombing concert venues and universities, where people are getting shot at bars for just being who they are, where Presidential candidates are vowing to murder people, and where casual hate speech is spewed out everywhere, who can blame parents like him? It’s one thing to let go of your fear and trust your child to find his way back home. But it’s more difficult to let go of your fear and trust that the world has enough good people to help him on his way.